Great observation — let's clarify:

When you use concurrency = 3 in Spring Kafka:

You're not creating one consumer that processes in parallel.

You're actually creating three separate consumer instances (threads) under the same consumer group.


Each of these consumers:

Acts independently.

Gets assigned one or more partitions (depending on how many partitions your topic has).

Consumes messages in parallel, each from its assigned partition(s).



---

Analogy

Think of concurrency = 3 like spinning up 3 worker threads, each behaving like its own Kafka consumer,
but all sharing the same group ID, so Kafka assigns them partitions without overlap.


---

Summary

Setting	Behavior

concurrency = 1 (default)	1 consumer thread → processes messages serially
concurrency = N	N consumer threads → each consumes different partitions in parallel
Same group ID	Kafka ensures each partition is processed by only one of the consumers

Excellent question.

In Spring Kafka, when you set concurrency = 3, here’s what happens under the hood:

1. KafkaListener Container Factory

You configure:

factory.setConcurrency(3);

This tells Spring to spin up 3 Kafka consumer threads, each an independent consumer instance under the same consumer group.


---

2. Partition Assignment Logic

Kafka (not Spring) is responsible for assigning partitions to consumer instances.

Let's break it down with an example:

Example:

Topic: orders

Partitions: 4 → P0, P1, P2, P3

Group ID: my-group

Concurrency: 3 → Spring creates C1, C2, C3 (in one app instance)


Kafka assigns partitions:

It might assign like this:

C1 → P0, P1

C2 → P2

C3 → P3


So each consumer thread processes only its assigned partition(s), and Spring handles the thread management.


---

How does Spring know which thread handles which partition?

Spring does not decide partition assignment.

Kafka’s coordinator assigns partitions to the consumer instances (based on group ID and active consumers).

Spring Kafka just starts N consumers using the same ConsumerFactory and lets Kafka assign partitions during rebalancing.



---

Summary Table

Partitions	Concurrency	Result

3	3	3 consumers each get 1 partition
4	3	One consumer gets 2 partitions
3	5	Only 3 consumers get assigned, 2 are idle
1	3	1 active consumer, 2 idle



---

If you want to explicitly assign partitions, you can also use @KafkaListener(topicPartitions = ...)
but then you must manage it manually, which is not dynamic.

Would you like that example too?




